Stephen Curry plays almost exclusively at the point guard position and has career averages of 24.3 points, 6.5 assists, 4.6 rebounds, 
and 1.7 steals per game.
He is a high-percentage free throw shooter, with a career free throw percentage of 90.7 through the end of the 2020–21 season.
Curry is the Warriors' all-time free-throw leader.
Micheal Jordan has led the NBA in free throw percentage four times.
Lebron James has been selected to seven All-NBA Teams and voted league MVP twice.
As a leader within the Warriors organization, he played a significant role in the recruitment of former MVP Kevin Durant to the Warriors.
Although capable of stealing the ball, having led the league in steals for the 2015–16 season,Curry has faced criticism for his defense.
He is used more for his offense while his teammates, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green, take on more defensive assignments. 
Curry's shooting ability ranges from scoring in great volume from underneath the rim all the way to near half-court.
Using an unorthodox jump shot, he is able to get the ball out of his hands in under half a second by releasing it on the way up, adding extra arc to his shot and making it difficult to block.   

Several tiger specimens were described and proposed as subspecies.
The validity of several tiger subspecies was questioned in 1999.
Most putative subspecies described in the 19th and 20th centuries were distinguished on basis of fur length and colouration,striping patterns and body size, hence characteristics that vary widely within populations. 
Morphologically, tigers from different regions vary little, and gene flow between populations in those regions is considered to have been possible during the Pleistocene. 
Therefore, it was proposed to recognize only two tiger subspecies as valid, namely P. t. tigris in mainland Asia, and P. t. sondaica in the Greater Sunda Islands.

After two unsuccessful seasons, Barcelona were in need of an overhaul, leading to the departure of Rijkaard and Ronaldinho. 
Upon the latter's departure, Messi was given the number 10 shirt. 
He signed a new contract in July with an annual salary of €7.8 million, becoming the club's highest-paid player.
Ahead of the new season, a major concern remained his frequent muscular injuries, which had left him side-lined for a total of eight months between 2006 and 2008. 
Messi aiming to shoot during the 2009 UEFA Champions League Final against Manchester United
In his first uninterrupted campaign,he scored 38 goals in 51 games,contributing alongside Eto'o and winger Thierry Henry to a total of 100 goals in all competitions, a record at the time for the club.
During his first season under Barcelona's new manager,former captain Pep Guardiola, 
Messi played mainly on the right wing. 
During the Clásico on 2 May 2009, however, Messi played for the first time as a false nine, 
positioned as a centre-forward but dropping deep into midfield to link up with Xavi and Andrés Iniesta. 
Messi set up his side's first goal and scored twice to end the match in an emphatic 6–2 victory, the team's greatest-ever score at Real Madrid's Santiago Bernabéu Stadium.
he played his first final since breaking into the first team on 13 May,scoring once and assisting a second goal as Barcelona defeated Athletic Bilbao 4–1 to win the Copa del Rey.
With 23 league goals from Messi that season, Barcelona became La Liga champions three days later and achieved its fifth double.